Doc/Enterprise#219 - Scheduler (#572)
Avaiga/taipy-doc: docs/manuals/core/scheduling/index.md

# Taipy Scheduler

!!! warning "Available in Taipy Enterprise edition"

    This section is relevant only to the Enterprise edition of Taipy.

> This documentation focuses on providing necessary information to use the Taipy `Scheduler^`, and in particular
> the capabilities related to scenario management and job execution. It is assumed that the reader already knows the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This documentation is primarily aimed at giving you the essential information needed to utilize the Taipy `Scheduler^`, with a specific emphasis on its capabilities regarding scenario management and job execution. It is assumed that the reader already knows the
```

Reviewer 2: PLease make the lines less than 100 char.

Author: I feel like the sentence is using too many advance words.

Tbh, I don't know what "with a specific emphasis on its capabilities regarding scenario management and job execution" means without re-reading it 2-3 times.

Reviewer: OK maybe let's try this less advanced wording:
This documentation is centered around providing essential information for using the Taipy `Scheduler^`, 
particularly focusing on the capabilities related to scenario management and job execution. 
It is assumed that the reader already knows the

Author: this is reasonable IMO. What do you think @jrobinAV?

[Taipy Core entities](../entities/index.md) described in a previous chapter.

Let’s assume also that the configuration represented in the picture below is implemented in the
module <a href="./code_example/my_config.py" download>`my_config.py`</a>.

=== "Module my_config.py"

    ```python linenums="1"
    {%
    include-markdown "./code_example/my_config.py"
    comments=false
    %}
    ```

## Start/Stop the scheduler

> For the scheduler to run the scheduled methods, first you need to start the scheduler using the `start()` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make the scheduler execute the scheduled methods, you must first start the scheduler by using the `start()` method.
```

Reviewer 2: I don't like the term `initiate` to talk about starting a service.
It s like a car you start it, you don't initiate it.

Reviewer: OK let's keep "start" then :) But "initiate" is a common word used in IT writing when you want to start/begin a process.

Reviewer 2: OK. My vocabulary is not so good. Let's use the most common word, whatever it is.

Reviewer: But both ways are OK from the English point of view, so we can keep "start" as well. The "start" wording is used quite often in other topics/sections as well, so to be consistent.

```python
import taipy as tp

tp.Scheduler.start()
```

Once the scheduler is started, the scheduled methods will run in the background at the scheduled time.

> While the scheduler is running, you can run other methods without being blocked by the scheduler.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the scheduler is running, you can schedule other methods without being blocked by the scheduler.
```

> Once the scheduler is started, the scheduled methods will run in the background at the scheduled time.
> While the scheduler is running, you can run other methods without being blocked by the scheduler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the scheduler is started, the scheduled methods will run in the background at their specified times. 
While the scheduler is running, you can execute other methods without being held up by the scheduler.
```

Reviewer 2: Same remark here.
I don't like the term `activated` to talk about a service.
It s still like a car or an engine. It is not activated, it is running.
What do you think?

Reviewer: Yup, here I agree, that "activated" does not reflect directly that we want to say the scheduler is running. I have updated the commit, thanks.

> Once the scheduler is started, the scheduled methods will run in the background at the scheduled time.
> While the scheduler is running, you can schedule other methods without being blocked by the scheduler.

Author: ```suggestion
Once the scheduler is started, the scheduled methods will run in the background at their specified times. 
While the scheduler is running, you can execute other methods without being blocked by the scheduler.
```

    the scheduled method will not run until the scheduler is started.

To stop the scheduler from running the scheduled methods, you can use the `stop()` method.

```python
tp.Scheduler.stop()
```

## Run a method every specific interval

Taipy `Scheduler^` provides the capability to run a method every specific interval.
The interval can be specified in seconds, minutes, hours, days, weeks, days, months or years.

```python linenums="1"
import taipy as tp
from my_config import monthly_scenario_cfg

monthly_scenario = tp.create_scenario(monthly_scenario_cfg)

# Submit a scenario every 3 second/minute/hour/day
# Starting 3 second/minute/hour/day from now
tp.Scheduler.every(3).seconds.do(tp.submit, monthly_scenario)
tp.Scheduler.every(3).minutes.do(tp.submit, monthly_scenario)
tp.Scheduler.every(3).hours.do(tp.submit, monthly_scenario)
tp.Scheduler.every(3).days.do(tp.submit, monthly_scenario)

# Submit a scenario every 1 week/month/year
# Starting 1 week/month/year from now
tp.Scheduler.every().weeks.do(tp.submit, monthly_scenario)
tp.Scheduler.every().months.do(tp.submit, monthly_scenario)
tp.Scheduler.every().years.do(tp.submit, monthly_scenario)

tp.Scheduler.start()
```

> In the above example, we schedule the `tp.submit(monthly_scenario)` method with different intervals.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the above example, we schedule the `tp.submit(monthly_scenario)` method with different intervals. We chose to submit a scenario as an example, but any Python method can be scheduled.
```

Author: ```suggestion
In the above example, we schedule the `tp.submit(monthly_scenario)` method with different intervals.
Notice that we chose to submit a scenario as an example, but any Python method can be scheduled.
```

- First, we need to call the `every()` method and provide the time interval.
  If not provided, the default interval is 1.
- Secondly, the time unit needs to be provided, which can be either
  `seconds`, `minutes`, `hours`, `days`, `weeks`, `months`, or `years`.
- Finally, we provide the `do()` method with the method to schedule and its parameters.
  In the example, we schedule the `tp.submit()` method, and provide `monthly_scenario` as the parameter.

Once scheduled, the method will run in the background. The first run will be:

- the number of interval from the scheduled time, or
- at the start of the scheduler if the scheduler is started **after** the time that the method supposed to run.

> ## Run a method at a specific time

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Run a method at a specific time and/or date
```

import taipy as tp
from my_config import monthly_scenario_cfg

monthly_scenario = tp.create_scenario(monthly_scenario_cfg)

tp.Scheduler.every().second.do(tp.submit, monthly_scenario)

all_scheduled_methods = tp.Scheduler.get_scheduled_methods()
```

The `tp.Scheduler.get_scheduled_methods()` method returns a list of `ScheduledMethod^` objects, which you can use to
get information or cancel the scheduled method.

## Cancel scheduled methods

To remove a scheduled method from the scheduler, use the `tp.Scheduler.cancel_scheduled_method(scheduled_method)` method.

```python linenums="1"
import taipy as tp
from my_config import monthly_scenario_cfg

monthly_scenario = tp.create_scenario(monthly_scenario_cfg)

monthly_submit_method = tp.Scheduler.every().second.do(tp.submit, monthly_scenario)

tp.Scheduler.cancel_scheduled_method(monthly_submit_method)
```

To remove all scheduled methods from the scheduler, use `tp.Scheduler.clear()`

```python linenums="1"
import taipy as tp
from my_config import monthly_scenario_cfg

monthly_scenario = tp.create_scenario(monthly_scenario_cfg)

tp.Scheduler.every().second.do(tp.submit, monthly_scenario)

tp.Scheduler.clear()
```

> ## Shortcut for scheduling Taipy methods

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Shortcut most used Taipy methods
```

Author: How about
```suggestion
## Shortcut for scheduling most used Taipy methods
```

Taipy `Scheduler^` provides shortcut for scheduling popular Taipy methods, including:

- `taipy.create_scenario()`
- `taipy.submit()`
- A combination of `taipy.create_scenario()` and `taipy.submit()`

> Instead of calling the `do()` method and providing the Taipy method to schedule, you can call
> the following method directly from the scheduler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of using the `do()` method and specifying the Taipy method to schedule, you can directly call the following method from the scheduler.
```
